---
layout: post
author: Nic Durish
banner: ../img/posts/18-03-26-b.jpg
divsize: half-div
title: "Encountering The R Programming Language In The Wild"
subtitle: A critique of the R programming language, generously padded with a personal anecdote.
categories: [Review]
tags: [Academic, CompSci, Programming]
notice: This paper was originally written for my course CIS*6650(01) - Programming Language Evaluation (GR), taken at the University of Guelph.
comments: true
---

If you’ve made it this far, you’ve likely read the previous papers in this 6650(01) sega; *Why the C Programming Language Deserves an F* & *A Scripture Reading - ‘The Humble Programmer’*, and probably also noticed a trend in my writing style, namely that even in technical writing, I’m a sucker for anecdotes, idioms and good old fashion stories. I’ve found critical thinking is amplified when it’s applicable and relatable, and have always appreciated the use of personable and accessible writing styles in formal and academic documents. Given that I haven’t been reprimanded as of yet, for my potentially excessive use of personal anecdotes (thank you!), I thought I would take this opportunity to explore this writing style a bit further and tell the story of my first true reflection of a programming language; R.

This paper explores my first impressions of R, introduced within a course called Econometrics, and how my work with the simple statistical analytics language had me flagged for potential academic misconduct. I describe my gripes with the language, such as it’s lack of defined programming paradigm (functional vs imperative), poor scoping, loosely and weakly typed data, and language inconsistencies and bloat in comparison to general-purpose languages. I also however explore some of the strengths I’ve grown to appreciate about R, from and since that experience, namely that it’s more accessible than I first thought and that the community, packages, as well graphical and data handling seem to have been designed with statistics and data in mind. In general, this paper avoids making objective and general statements about the overall quality of R, by instead making observations on it’s relative strengths and shortcomings.  


# Using R as a CompSci Student
It was September, 2015 here at the University of Guelph and I was just starting the fourth and final year of my Undergraduate degree in Computer Science, meaning I had recently developed both a mild proficiency in programming and a mild confidence (probably more aptly described as arrogance). I had, up until this point only used general purpose languages such as C, Python, and Java and application specific languages like MySQL, PostGres, CSS, HTML, and Javascript. On top of my compsci courses, I had also registered for a single course to fulfill the requirements for my Minor in Economics. I picked Econometrics with Dr. Prescott for a multitude of reasons, but the most prominent was surely a single sentence within the course description that hinted at the inclusion of programming; “This course will introduce students to economic analysis and modelling through applying statical programming tools”. While I’m generally quite fond of economic courses, I was particularly excited for this one, as it presented an opportunity to both apply my programming knowledge to my minor, and of course to show off to some of my peers outside my major.

Unfortunately, much of my excitement was replaced by frustration as I began working on the first of three assignments analyzing economic data. We were tasked with performing some fairly trivial statistical analyses such as Nonparametric & Linear Regression analyses, Multiple Regression Modelling, Semi-Log Modelling, and Hypothesis Testing on a table of real financial data from a subset of Malawians. My troubles however weren’t based on the problem I was solving, rather what we were using to solve it; the R programming language and environment for statistical computing and graphing.

We were provided some lab tutorials on interfacing with the R environment, a .csv database<sup>[1](#1)</sup> containing 9578 entries, and a reasonably large set of documentation on how to interact with the data. Through the use of single lines commands, we were to apply provided equations, perform particular analytics and chart some graphs while using pen and paper or a spreadsheet to log temporary values. For most of my peers this was a reasonably straight-forward task, and they spent the majority of their time writing their supplementary 2000 word essays. I, however, spent most of my time reading R documentation, writing new functions, fiddling with the language and generally pounding sand, an effort which ended up teaching me a lesson or two and landing me a meeting to discuss my potential Academic Misconduct.


# Functional or Imperative?
Initially I thought R was a functional programming language, as it boasted functions as first-class objects, and initially seemed to treat variables as immutable. Functional programming languages treat statements as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoid mutable data or changing states. Unlike imperative (or procedural) languages which generally denote everything as a command, data as mutable and functions as subroutines. Many other packages, including MatLab, SAS, SPSS and Stata are considered procedural, with procedures that typically do data analyses down columns, and functions that do calculations across rows. R however, has only functions and those functions can do both. Functions may have a preference to go down rows or across columns but for many functions you can use the “apply" family of functions to force then to go in either direction. It’s a unique specification compared to other statistical languages, but it allows R to treat functions as first-class objects.

R continued acting functional, while using the console for simple commands like `mean(bin$Age)`, `xs[nb]*(1-r)+xs[na]*r` or `var(bin$wage_hrs)^0.5`. This
changed however when we needed to produce histograms using a subset of our data, meaning for the first time we used an assignment statement, in this case I believe it was `set4 <- cbind(set4,F,Urban,Educ)`. I then checked a conditional statement without an else such as `if ( x==1 ){ x <- 2# } x#` and sure enough nothing was wrong. The functional interpretation of if is that it is an expression that evaluates to some value. To evaluate the value of `if c then e1 else e2` you evaluate the condition `c` and then evaluate either `e1` or `e2`, depending on the condition. If you have just `if c then e`, then you don't know what the result of the evaluation should be if c is false, because there is no else branch. I wasn’t writing expressions, I was writing commands. Printing the contents of a variable after changing it ( `x <- 2# x# x <- 3# x#` ) confirmed that data was indeed mutable as well.

After reading some documentation, I found that R is indeed technically neither functional nor imperative, as it treats functions as first-class objects, yet data is mutable and statements are commands. This is awkward for a number of reasons, but the most significant is that it allows inconsistent and unfamiliar coding style and structures. I ended up moving as much of the code into a procedural format as possible, moving the collection of copy-paste commands and long equations into functions, and temporary pen-and-paper data into assigned and mutable variables.


# Scoping and Typing

One of my next grievances with R, was it’s lack of native lexical scoping or namespaces. A namespace is a declarative region that provides a scope to the identifiers (functions, variables, etc) inside it. Namespaces and scopes are used to organize code into logical groups and to prevent name collisions that can occur when including multiple libraries. I spent many evenings debugging my code before realizing that I had used a variable i that was being reinitialized by function calls (see Figure 1). Without namespaces, you live in constant fear of using the same variable name as one in your library or imports.

R also has dynamic and weak typing, meaning anything can be assigned to variables and implicit conversions are performed liberally, even during computation (see Figure 2). typeof simply returns one of the four types of R objects; symbol, pairlist, closure or environment. This can get frustrating when functions are indistinguishable from variables and a character string “1234” looks like a number 1234. While not a particularly large flaw, weakly typed systems can be difficult to manage and generally aren’t suitable for large programming tasks. In light of these problems, I rewrote all my functions to include unique variable names and cleared variables before use.



{% highlight lisp %}
x = 5
y = x + 5 + 2
if (y = x + 7)
	printf("TRUE")
y = x + 5 = 10 + 2 = 12
{% endhighlight %}


> "This author’s experiences with wizards were largely unfortunate. He found it impossible to avoid confronting them in text editors. Worst are those wizards that constantly interfere with one’s writing... if at least they could easily be deactivated, but typically they are obstinate and immortal like devils."

<br>

<a name="1">1: </a> I use the term 'database' here quite lightly<br>